>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, JANUARY 21:
DONALD TRUMP'S FIRST FULL DAY AS
PRESIDENT, AS ANTI-TRUMP
MARCHERS PROTEST IN CITIES
ACROSS THE WORLD.
AND, REFORMING HOW CONGRESS DOES
BUSINESS.
FORMER MEMBERS HAVE HOPES FOR
BIPARTISANSHIP.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ON DONALD TRUMP'S FIRST FULL DAY
IN OFFICE, THE NATION'S CAPITAL
SAW A MASSIVE PROTEST OF MR.
TRUMP'S POLICIES AND PRESIDENCY,
AND A CALL FOR THE PROTECTION OF
RIGHTS.
ORGANIZERS SAY HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE FROM ALL
OVER THE COUNTRY CAME TO
WASHINGTON, D.C. FOR WHAT WAS A
BILLED AS A WOMEN'S MARCH ON
WASHINGTON.
PROTESTERS PACKED THE ENTIRE
ROUTE FROM THE CAPITOL TO THE
WHITE HOUSE, MAKING A FORMAL
MARCH NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE, THOUGH
MANY ATTENDEES MARCHED ON THEIR
OWN FOLLOWING A RALLY THAT
LASTED MOST OF THE DAY.
THERE WERE ALSO HUNDREDS OF
SISTER MARCHES IN CITIES ALL
ACROSS THE U.S., AND OVERSEAS
FROM ARGENTINA TO AUSTRALIA.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO HAS THIS REPORT, FROM
WASHINGTON.
>> Reporter: THE FIRST MARCHERS
BEGAN ARRIVING NEAR THE CAPITOL
BUILDING BEFORE DAWN.
THERE WERE WOMEN-- AND MEN-- OF
ALL AGES FROM ALL OVER THE
COUNTRY.
A MIX OF ETHNIC, RELIGIOUS, AND
CLASS BACKGROUNDS.
AMONG THE MANY FIRST-TIME
DEMONSTRATORS WAS JANET CHEN,
WHO BROUGHT HER EIGHT-YEAR-OLD
DAUGHTER, MOLLY.
THEY'RE WORRIED ABOUT THE
REPUBLICAN ROLLBACK OF THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, OR
OBAMACARE.
>> I HAVE A HEART DEFECT, AND I
WANT TO GET HEALTH INSURANCE
WHEN I'M OLDER, BUT I MIGHT NOT
BE ABLE TO.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT THAT
THE NEXT GENERATION OF LITTLE
GIRLS STAND UP FOR WOMEN'S
RIGHTS AND REALIZE THERE'S A
REAL THREAT TO WOMEN'S RIGHTS IN
THIS COUNTRY RIGHT NOW WITH THE
INCOMING ADMINISTRATION.
>> Reporter: DEBBIE SNOWDON CAME
FROM NORTH CAROLINA TO SUPPORT
ABORTION RIGHTS AND FUNDING FOR
PLANNED PARENTHOOD.
>> IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT TO ME
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO PROBABLY
REVERSE ROE VS. WADE, TAKE AWAY
ABORTION RIGHTS IN THIS COUNTRY.
I'M VERY CONCERNED.
I'M AT AN AGE WHEN I CAN
REMEMBER US FIGHTING FOR THOSE
RIGHTS, AND IT'S REALLY HARD TO
BELIEVE WE'RE IN DANGER OF
LOSING THEM.
>> Reporter: WHILE THE
OVERRIDING MESSAGE WE HEARD FROM
PEOPLE HERE WAS ANTI-TRUMP,
THE ISSUES MOTIVATING MARCHERS
WERE AS DIVERSE AS THE CROWDS
HERE.
ANJUM KHAN, FROM MARYLAND, SAID
SHE'S CONCERNED ABOUT MUSLIM
RIGHTS AND TRUMP'S PROMISE TO
BAN MUSLIMS FROM ENTERING THE
COUNTRY.
>> WHEN HE SAID HE'S GOING TO
ERADICATE ISLAMIC TERRORISM,
THAT'S WONDERFUL!
LIKE, YES, PLEASE DO THAT.
BUT IN DOING THAT, DON'T TRAMPLE
ON MY RIGHTS.
>> Reporter: ROHIMA MIAH HAS
MARCHED ON WASHINGTON BEFORE FOR
CIVIL RIGHTS AND WAS AMONG THE
PROTESTORS AT THE INAUGURATION
YESTERDAY.
>> AS A BLACK WOMAN WITH A
30-YEAR-OLD BLACK SON THAT LIVES
IN NEW YORK CITY, IT SHOULD BE
AN ISSUE FOR ALL PEOPLE-- THAT
OUR CHILDREN ARE SAFE.
>> Reporter: JUDY AMES, A GAY
RIGHTS ACTIVIST SINCE THE AIDS
EPIDEMIC STARTED IN THE 1980s,
WAS HERE WITH A GROUP OF GAY
MUSICIANS.
>> WE JUST DON'T THINK THAT
WOMEN'S RIGHTS AND CIVIL RIGHTS
AND EVERYBODY'S RIGHTS SHOULD BE
JUST TRAMPLED ON AND THROWN
AWAY.
IT'S RIDICULOUS.
>> Reporter: THE MARCH'S WIDE-
RANGING POLICY PLATFORM
ADVOCATED FOR ECONOMIC JUSTICE
FOR WOMEN, KEEPING ABORTION
ACCESS SAFE AND LEGAL,
IMMIGRATION REFORM, POLICE
ACCOUNTABILITY, UNION RIGHTS,
SEX WORKER RIGHTS, AND
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
>> WOMEN MATTER.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
AND WE WILL NOT BE SHY ABOUT
STANDING UP TO WHAT MATTERS TO
US.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
AND HERE'S WHAT MATTERS TO ME:
THAT MY DAUGHTER INHERITS A
WORLD WHERE A HEALTHY
ENVIRONMENT IS A BASIC RIGHT FOR
ALL OF US.
>> Reporter: MARCH LEADERS, LIKE
ACTRESS AMERICA FERRARA, WHOSE
PARENTS ARE FROM HONDURAS, SAID
THEIR RIGHTS ARE UNDER ATTACK.
>>WEARE AMERICA!
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
ANDWEARE HERE TO STAY.
WE WILL NOT GO FROM BEING A
NATION OF IMMIGRANTS TO A NATION
OF IGNORANCE.
>> YOU LOOK GREAT!
>> Reporter: LONG-TIME POLITICAL
ACTIVIST GLORIA STEINEM CALLED
ON THE CROWD TO USE THEIR
"PEOPLE POWER" TO KEEP A CLOSE
EYE ON THE NEW PRESIDENT.
>> TRUMP AND HIS HANDLERS HAVE
FOUND A FOX FOR EVERY CHICKEN
COUP IN WASHINGTON.
AND HIS TWITTER FINGER MUST NOT
BECOME A TRIGGER FINGER.
>> Reporter: KRISTIN ROWE-
FINKEBEINER, THE HEAD OF THE
GROUP MOMS RISING, CALLED FOR
EQUAL PAY FOR EQUAL WORK.
>> WOMEN MAKE 80 CENTS TO A
MAN'S DOLLAR.
MOMS EARN ONLY 71 CENTS TO A
MAN'S DOLLAR, AND MOMS OF COLOR
EARN AS LOW AS 46 CENTS TO A
MAN'S DOLLAR.
>> Reporter: AND ACTIVIST
FILMMAKER MICHAEL MOORE HAD THIS
WORD OF ADVICE FOR THE ASSEMBLED
WOMEN.
>>YOUHAVE TO RUN FOR OFFICE!
YOU!
YES, YOU!
>> EVEN IF YOU'RE NOT SITTING IN
THE WHITE HOUSE, EVEN IF YOU'RE
NOT A MEMBER OF THE UNITED
STATES CONGRESS, EVEN IF YOU
DON'T RUN A BIG CORPORATE SUPER
PAC, YOU HAVE THE POWER!
AND WE THE PEOPLE HAVE THE
POWER.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE SPEECHES,
THE PROTESTERS INTENDED TO MARCH
ABOUT 2.5 MILES FROM NEAR THE
CAPITOL, ALONG THE NATIONAL
MALL TO THE WHITE HOUSE, BUT
THEY WERE UNABLE TO DO THAT DUE
TO THE SIZE OF THEIR CROWD.
THE SAME THING HAPPENED IN
CHICAGO, WHERE 150,000 PEOPLE
TURNED UP FOR A RALLY IN
CHICAGO'S GRANT PARK-- SO MANY
MORE THAN EXPECTED.
IN NEW YORK, SOME 200,000 PEOPLE
RALLIED OUTSIDE THE UNITED
NATIONS BEFORE MARCHING THROUGH
MANHATTAN IN SUPPORT OF HUMAN
AND CIVIL RIGHTS.
IN LOS ANGELES, TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF DEMONSTRATORS
CONVERGED ON DOWNTOWN'S PERSHING
SQUARE.
OVERSEAS, THOUSANDS OF TRUMP
PROTESTERS TOOK TO THE STREETS
OF LONDON.
IN PARIS, THOUSANDS MARCHED NEAR
THE EIFFEL TOWER CARRYING SIGNS
SAYING: "WE HAVE OUR EYES ON
YOU, MR. TRUMP."
AMONG THE THOUSANDS OF TRUMP
PROTESTERS IN SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA,
ONE WOMAN SAID, "WE WANT TO SEND
THE SIGN TO THE WOMEN IN THE
U.S. THAT WE ARE ALL IN THIS
TOGETHER."
>> Stewart: IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTING FROM WASHINGTON,
THANKS.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP'S
MOTORCADE PASSED BY SOME
PROTESTORS IN WASHINGTON TODAY
WITHOUT INCIDENT.
IT HAPPENED THIS MORNING, AFTER
MR. TRUMP AND VICE PRESIDENT
MIKE PENCE HAD ATTENDED AN
INTERFAITH PRAYER SERVICE AT THE
NATIONAL CATHEDRAL.
IN THE AFTERNOON, THE PRESIDENT
MET WITH OFFICIALS AT CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY HEADQUARTERS
IN NORTHERN VIRGINIA, THOUGH HIS
PICK FOR C.I.A. DIRECTOR, MIKE
POMPEO, HAS YET TO BE CONFIRMED
BY THE SENATE.
>> VERY, VERY FEW PEOPLE COULD
DO THE JOB YOU PEOPLE DO, AND I
WANT TO JUST LET YOU KNOW I AM
SO BEHIND YOU.
AND I KNOW MAYBE SOMETIMES YOU
HAVEN'T GOTTEN THE BACKING THAT
YOU'VE WANTED, AND YOU'RE GOING
TO GET SO MUCH BACKING.
MAYBE YOU'RE GOING TO SAY,
"PLEASE DON'T GIVE US SO MUCH
BACKING."
>> Stewart: IN ONE OF HIS FIRST
ACTS IN OFFICE, PRESIDENT TRUMP
YESTERDAY SIGNED AN EXECUTIVE
ORDER DIRECTING EXECUTIVE
AGENCIES TO STOP ENFORCING
REGULATIONS RELATED TO THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, ALSO KNOWN
AS OBAMACARE.
AS THE ADMINISTRATION WORKS WITH
CONGRESS TO REPEAL AND REPLACE
THE FORMER PRESIDENT'S HEALTH
INSURANCE REFORMS, THE ORDER
WOULD "WAIVE, DEFER, GRANT
EXEMPTIONS FROM, OR DELAY" ANY
TAXES OR PENALTIES FOR NOT
FOLLOWING THE MANDATE TO HAVE
INSURANCE.
LAST NIGHT, THE PRESIDENT AND
FIRST LADY MELANIA TRUMP
ATTENDED THREE INAUGURAL BALLS,
SHARING THEIR FIRST DANCE TO A
SONG MADE FAMOUS BY FRANK
SINATRA, "MY WAY."
>> LET ME ASK YOU, SHOULD I KEEP
THE TWITTER GOING OR NOT?
KEEP IT GOING?
I THINK SO.
>> Stewart: AND HE HAS.
MR. TRUMP TWEETING TODAY:
"I AM HONORED TO SERVE YOU, THE
GREAT AMERICAN PEOPLE, AS YOUR
45th PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES!"
JOINING ME HERE IN THE STUDIO TO
DISCUSS THE START OF THE TRUMP
PRESIDENCY IS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S
JEFF GREENFIELD.
JEFF, YOU WERE A SPEECHWRITER
FOR SENATOR ROBERT F. KENNEDY.
SO WHAT STRUCK YOU ABOUT THE
TRUMP INAUGURAL SPEECH?
>> HOW MUCH IT WAS CONSISTENT
WITH THE MOST FORCEFUL ARGUMENTS
OF HIS CAMPAIGN.
THERE WAS VERY LITTLE GIVE IN
SAYING, "OKAY, NOW THAT I'M
PRESIDENT, I'VE GOT TO BE A
LITTLE DIFFERENT."
YEAH, THERE WERE TOUCHES ABOUT
"WE HAVE TO BE TOGETHER AND
WE'LL BE UNIFIED."
BUT THE CENTRAL ARGUMENTS OF HIS
CAMPAIGN-- THAT THE BIG SHOTS IN
WASHINGTON HAVE BETRAYED YOU,
HAVE GOTTEN RICH AND POWERFUL AT
YOUR EXPENSE, AND ALL THOSE
COUNTRIES OVERSEAS HAVE
PROSPERED AT YOUR EXPENSE-- WAS
FRONT AND CENTER IN THE SPEECH.
AND I DID NOT EXPECT THE
SPEECH... ACTUALLY, I WAS
WONDERING BEFORE, WOULD HE BE AS
FORCEFUL AND BLUNT AND TOUGH
ABOUT THAT AS HE WAS IN THE
CAMPAIGN?
AND THE ANSWER WAS YES.
>> Stewart: WELL, FROM THAT
SPEECH, WHAT SHOULD WE BE
LOOKING FOR IN TERMS OF POLICY?
>> ONE OF THE THINGS THAT IF I
WERE A REPUBLICAN LEADER IN
CONGRESS WOULD GIVE ME A LITTLE
BIT OF AGITA IS THAT WHEN HE
SAYS THE ESTABLISHMENT HAS
BETRAYED MIDDLE-CLASS AND
WORKING CLASS PEOPLE, HE'S
TALKING ABOUT BOTH PARTIES.
IT'S ANOTHER REMINDER THAT IN
EFFECT HE IS A THIRD-PARTY
CANDIDATE WHO HAPPENED TO GET
CONTROL OF ONE OF THE TWO MAJOR
PARTIES.
SO ON ISSUES LIKE A BIG
INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, FOR
INSTANCE, WHICH IS NOT PART OF
THE REPUBLICAN PLAYBOOK...
>> Stewart: THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO BE SO HAPPY ABOUT SPENDING
MONEY ON INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> THAT'S PART OF IT.
FREE TRADE HAS BEEN PART AND
PARCEL OF THE REPUBLICAN
PLAYBOOK FOR 60 YEARS OR MORE.
HE IS CLEARLY NOT A FREE TRADER.
AND THEN WHEN HE SAYS, "WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE INSURANCE FOR
EVERYBODY" WHICH IS AT LEAST
SOMETHING HE SAID IN ONE OF HIS
INTERVIEWS, WELL, HOW DOES THAT
SQUARE WITH THE REPUBLICAN
CONGRESSIONAL AGENDA WHICH NO
MATTER WHAT PLAN YOU LOOK AT,
LOOKS TO BE A LOT MORE COST-
EFFECTIVE IS ONE WAY PUT IT, OR
PENURIOUS, IN TERMS OF COVERAGE.
SO THERE ARE SOME SIGNALS THERE
FROM THE INAUGURAL, TO THE SHOCK
OF SOME PEOPLE IN WASHINGTON,
THAT HE APPARENTLY MEANS TO TRY
TO DO WHAT HE SAID HE WAS GOING
TO TRY TO DO.
>> Stewart: JEFF, LET'S TALK
ABOUT TODAY'S EVENTS, THE HUGE
PROTESTS THAT ARE HAPPENING IN
MAJOR CITIES AND IN SMALLER
CITIES ALL ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
IT'S THE WOMEN'S MARCH IN
WASHINGTON.
AND IF YOU GO TO THEIR WEB SITE,
THIS IS THEIR STATED PURPOSE:
GIVEN THE SIZE OF THESE MARCHES
AND THE... AND HOW FAR SPREAD
THEY ARE AROUND THE GLOBE, IT
SEEMS LIKE IT'S MORE THAN THAT.
>> I THINK IT IS REALLY ALMOST A
PRIMAL EXPRESSION OF FEAR,
ANGER, DETERMINATION TO PUSH
BACK ON DONALD TRUMP.
WHETHER IT'S WHAT HE'S HAD TO
SAY ABOUT WOMEN, THE ACTIONS
THAT HE'S BOASTED OF, HIS
POSITIONS ON THINGS LIKE
ABORTION AND PLANNED PARENTHOOD.
BUT I THINK IT WOULD BE A
MISTAKE TO LOOK AT THIS MARCH AS
A SINGULAR MARCH.
THE DEFINITION THAT YOU GAVE US,
THAT'S PRETTY BROAD.
THAT CAN MEAN EVERYTHING FROM
AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE TO PAY
EQUITY TO, YOU KNOW, ABORTION TO
GAY RIGHTS...
>> Stewart: CLIMATE.
>> YEAH.
SO I THINK IT'S DIFFERENT FROM,
FOR INSTANCE, THE MARCHS ABOUT
VIETNAM OR THE RIGHT-TO-LIFE
MARCH THAT WILL HAPPEN IN A FEW
WEEKS.
WE KNOW WHAT THOSE MARCHES ARE
ABOUT AND YOU CAN BE VERY
SPECIFIC.
I JUST THINK IN THIS CASE IT'S
MUCH MORE OF A VERY WIDE
COALITION OF PEOPLE WHO JUST
STILL ARE IN A STATE OF ALMOST
SHOCK THAT DONALD TRUMP IS THE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
>> Stewart: JEFF GREENFIELD,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> PLEASURE.
>> Stewart: WATCH GLORIA
STEINEM'S SPEECH AT THE WOMEN'S
MARCH ON WASHINGTON.
VISIT facebook.com/newshour.
THE NATION'S NEW CONGRESS FACES
THE CHALLENGE OF OVERCOMING THE
PARTISAN RANCOR THAT PRODUCES
GRIDLOCK.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S MEGAN
THOMPSON SPOKE WITH TWO LONGTIME
MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES WHO JUST LEFT
OFFICE, TO HEAR THEIR
PRESCRIPTION FOR CHANGE.
>> Reporter: DEMOCRAT STEVE
ISRAEL SERVED IN CONGRESS FROM
2001 TO 2016, REPRESENTING A
POLITICALLY CENTRIST DISTRICT ON
LONG ISLAND.
A FEW YEARS INTO HIS TENURE, HE
CO-FOUNDED THE "CENTER AISLE
CAUCUS."
THE EFFORT TO FOSTER
BIPARTISANSHIP REGULARLY DREW
AROUND 25 DEMOCRATS AND 25
REPUBLICANS TO A CHINESE
RESTAURANT NEAR CAPITOL HILL.
>> WE HAD A KITCHEN TIMER.
FIVE MINUTES TO STATE YOUR
DISAGREEMENTS, AND THEN 55
MINUTES TO FIGURE OUT WHERE YOU
COULD AGREE.
IT WAS SUBLIME.
IT WAS SO LIBERATING.
YOU KNOW WHAT I LEARNED FROM
THAT EXPERIENCE AT CENTER AISLE
CAUCUS?
DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS ARE
GOING TO DISAGREE 75% OF THE
TIME, AND THAT'S OKAY.
THE PROBLEM WITH WASHINGTON IS
THAT WE'RE SO BUSY BEATING EACH
OTHER UP ON THE 75% THAT WE WILL
NEVER AGREE TO, THAT WE FORGET
THAT THERE'S 25% WAITING TO BE
PASSED.
AND THAT CAN BE PASSED QUICKLY.
>> Reporter: BACK IN THE
CAPITOL, ISRAEL FOUND THOSE
AGREEMENTS BEHIND THE SCENES
RARELY BECAME POLICY.
ONE EXAMPLE: INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> SO, I'D HAVE CONVERSATIONS
WITH COLLEAGUES ON THE OTHER
SIDE OF THE AISLE WHO WOULD SAY,
"YEAH, WE'RE SPENDING THE LOWEST
LEVEL OF FINANCING ON
INFRASTRUCTURE IN RECENT
HISTORY.
WE NEED TO DO MORE.
WE NEED TO GENERATE THOSE
INVESTMENTS."
BUT THEY COULDN'T SAY THAT IN
PUBLIC BECAUSE THEY WOULD BE
TARRED AS TAX-AND-SPENDERS.
AND THEY JUST COULDN'T WITHSTAND
THAT LABEL.
>> BOTH PARTIES ARE VERY, VERY
PARTISAN.
>> THANK YOU, GENTLEMEN, FOR
YIELDING.
>> Reporter: FOR 14 YEARS,
REPUBLICAN CANDICE MILLER
REPRESENTED MACOMB COUNTY,
MICHIGAN, JUST NORTH OF DETROIT,
A SWING AREA OF A SWING STATE,
WON TWICE BY BARACK OBAMA AND
THEN WON BY DONALD TRUMP.
SHE WAS MICHIGAN'S SECRETARY OF
STATE BEFORE SERVING IN
CONGRESS.
>> I'VE BEEN USED TO REACHING
OUT ACROSS THE AISLE AND WORKING
WITH DEMOCRATS.
AND WE WORKED PRETTY WELL IN
MACOMB COUNTY BECAUSE OF THAT.
BUT THEN, OF COURSE, WHEN I WENT
TO CONGRESS, I FOUND IT WAS A
MUCH MORE PARTISAN ENVIRONMENT.
>> Reporter: SHE AGREES WITH
ISRAEL-- PARTISANSHIP IMPEDES
PROGRESS ON BIG ISSUES.
>> WHETHER THAT'S DEALING WITH
ENTITLEMENTS, OR DEALING WITH
NATIONAL DEFENSE, OR DEALING
WITH SO MANY THINGS THAT FACE
US, WE NEED TO COME TOGETHER IN
SOME WAYS ON SOME OF THESE HUGE
ISSUES.
>> Reporter: WITH ITS TEA PARTY
WING INSURGENT IN 2010,
REPUBLICANS PICKED UP 63 SEATS
AND REGAINED CONTROL OF THE
HOUSE.
>> I THINK THAT THE TEA PARTY
WAS A RESULT OF PEOPLE AROUND
THE COUNTRY WHO WERE JUST
ABSOLUTELY FED UP WITH THE WAY
THAT WASHINGTON WAS OPERATING.
BECAUSE THE WAY THAT PRESIDENT
OBAMA WAS REALLY OPERATING WITH
ALL OF THE EXECUTIVE ORDERS,
WITH OBAMACARE.
SO MANY GOVERNMENTAL
OVERREACHES-- I THINK THERE WAS
A HUGE PUSHBACK.
>> Reporter: BUT, MILLER SAYS,
THE PARTY'S SHIFT TO THE RIGHT
AFFECTED ITS OWN ABILITY TO GET
THINGS DONE.
IN 2015, SOME OF THE MOST
CONSERVATIVE HOUSE MEMBERS
FORMED THE FREEDOM CAUCUS, WHICH
VOTED "NO" AS A BLOC ON MANY
ISSUES.
>> IT REALLY HINDERED, I THINK,
THE ABILITY FOR THE REPUBLICAN
CONFERENCE WHEN I WAS THERE.
EVEN THOUGH WE WERE IN THE
MAJORITY, WE COULDN'T GET THE
OPTIMAL KIND OF BILLS THAT WE
WERE LOOKING FOR DONE.
>> Reporter: ISRAEL SAYS THE
POLARIZATION IN CONGRESS HAS
GROWN BECAUSE OF PARTISAN
REDISTRICTING, THE WAY STATES
REDREW HOUSE DISTRICT LINES
FOLLOWING THE 2010 CENSUS.
>> TOO MANY CONGRESSIONAL
DISTRICTS ARE DRAWN TO PROTECT A
REPUBLICAN INCUMBENT OR A
DEMOCRATIC INCUMBENT.
AND IF THEY'RE DRAWN TO PROTECT
A DEMOCRATIC OR REPUBLICAN
INCUMBENT, THAT INCUMBENT
NECESSARILY HAS TO CUT FURTHER
AND FURTHER TO THE LEFT OR THE
RIGHT.
IF YOU HAD LESS PARTISAN
REDISTRICTING, WHERE DISTRICTS
WERE KIND OF DRAWN MORE TOWARDS
THE MIDDLE, YOU WOULD HAVE MORE
MEETING IN THE MIDDLE BY MEMBERS
OF CONGRESS.
>> Reporter: ISRAEL SUPPORTS
TAKING THE REDISTRICTING POWER
AWAY FROM STATE LEGISLATORS AND
PUTTING INDEPENDENT COMMISSIONS
IN CHARGE, BUT MILLER SAYS
THAT'S NOT SO SIMPLE.
>> YOU'RE NEVER GOING TO TAKE
POLITICS OUT OF POLITICS; IT'S
JUST IMPOSSIBLE.
SO WHEN THEY SAY, "WELL, WE'RE
GOING TO GET A NON-POLITICAL
GROUP THAT'S GOING TO DRAW THESE
LINES," UH, OKAY.
(LAUGHS)
I DON'T KNOW IF ANYONE BELIEVES
THAT.
I DON'T KNOW WHO THE NON-
POLITICAL PEOPLE ARE THAT ARE
GOING TO DRAW POLITICAL LINES
THAT HAVE NO INTEREST IN
POLITICS?
MAYBE.
>> Reporter: ISRAEL, WHO WILL
NOW CHAIR AN INSTITUTE ON GLOBAL
ISSUES AT LONG ISLAND
UNIVERSITY, LEFT CONGRESS IN
PART BECAUSE HE CAME TO DREAD
THE FUNDRAISING...
>> I'M STEVE ISRAEL, AND I
APPROVE THIS MESSAGE.
>> Reporter: ...NOT JUST FOR HIS
OWN CAMPAIGNS, BUT FOR FELLOW
DEMOCRATS WHEN HE CHAIRED THE
DEMOCRATIC CONGRESSIONAL
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE.
>> I ACTUALLY CALCULATED THE
AMOUNT OF TIME THAT I SPENT
RAISING MONEY FOR MY RE-
ELECTIONS OVER 16 YEARS: 4,200
HOURS ON THE PHONE ASKING PEOPLE
FOR MONEY, DIALING FOR DOLLARS.
1,600 SEPARATE COCKTAIL PARTIES.
THAT'S 4,200 HOURS THAT I WASN'T
SPENDING TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
HOW WE'RE GOING TO STRENGTHEN
MEDICARE, TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
HOW WE'RE GOING TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE MIDDLE CLASS GROWS
THEIR PAYCHECKS.
>> Reporter: THE NEED FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS IS
ONE AREA WHERE ISRAEL AND MILLER
SEE COMMON GROUND.
IN HER NEW JOB AS MACOMB COUNTY
PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSIONER,
MILLER HAS HAD TO DEAL WITH A
MASSIVE SINKHOLE CAUSED BY A
BROKEN SEWER LINE.
>> THAT'S A VERY VIVID
DEMONSTRATION OF HOW OUR
IMMEDIATE AREA-- AND QUITE
FRANKLY, THIS COULD HAPPEN IN
LOTS OF PLACES IN OUR COUNTRY,
BECAUSE WE HAVE NOT ADDRESSED
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE'VE NOT INVESTED ENOUGH
AND SO, I'M VERY HOPEFUL
PRESIDENT TRUMP WILL BE ABLE TO
GET A VERY GOOD TRANSPORTATION
AND INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT
BILL THROUGH.
>> Reporter: SO AS CONGRESS GETS
DOWN TO BUSINESS UNDER THE NEW
PRESIDENT, MILLER AND ISRAEL
HAVE THIS ADVICE FOR NEW
MEMBERS.
>> YOU MIGHT ONLY BE THERE FOR
ONE SESSION OF CONGRESS.
YOU MIGHT BE THERE FOR A MUCH
LONGER TIME.
BUT BE BOLD, DON'T BE AFRAID TO
BE BOLD.
DO THE RIGHT THING, BE BOLD.
NEVER FORGET WHO YOU ACTUALLY
ARE REPRESENTING, THOUGH.
THESE ARE YOUR BOSSES.
AND SO, ALWAYS REMEMBER YOUR
CONSTITUENTS BEFORE YOU THINK
ABOUT YOUR PARTY.
>> NUMBER ONE, FIND A FRIEND
WITH WHOM YOU DISAGREE.
UNDERSTAND THERE ARE NO
ABSOLUTES IN WASHINGTON.
MOST OF THE ISSUES THAT YOU'RE
GOING TO BE DEALING WITH ARE
ACTUALLY IN A GRAY AREA.
AND SO, FIND SOMEBODY WHO YOU
LIKE BUT SOMEBODY WHO YOU
DISAGREE WITH, AND START TO
LEARN FROM ONE ANOTHER.
>> Stewart: THE ONLY CABINET-
LEVEL TRUMP APPOINTEES CONFIRMED
BY THE U.S. SENATE SO FAR ARE
DEFENSE SECRETARY JAMES MATTIS
AND HOMELAND SECURITY SECRETARY
JOHN KELLEY, BOTH FORMER MARINE
CORPS GENERALS.
ALSO ON THE JOB IS TRUMP
NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISOR
MICHAEL FLYNN, WHO DID NOT
REQUIRE CONFIRMATION.
BUT MANY VACANCIES IN THE
ADMINISTRATION'S NATIONAL
SECURITY TEAM REMAIN.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS IT IS "POLITICO"
CORRESPONDENT MICHAEL CROWLEY.
MICHAEL, SO PRESIDENT TRUMP
VISITED THE C.I.A. TODAY, AND HE
WAS VERY COMPLIMENTARY, BUT AS
WE KNOW, THROUGH MOST OF THE
TRANSITION, HE'S BASICALLY
DERIDED THE AGENCY.
SO HOW DOES THAT RELATIONSHIP
MOVE FORWARD, AND WHAT SHOULD WE
BE LOOKING FOR... LOOKING AT AS
IT MOVES FORWARD?
>> WELL, I THINK AS TRUMP
HIMSELF SAID AT THE C.I.A.
TODAY, HE'S GOING TO HAVE HIS
OWN DIRECTOR COMING IN.
HIS NOMINEE IS MIKE POMPEO, WHO
IS A REPUBLICAN CONGRESSMAN.
NOW, DEMOCRATS ARE PUTTING UP A
LITTLE MORE OF A FIGHT THAN HAD
BEEN EXPECTED A COUPLE OF DAYS
AGO.
IT'S NOT GUARANTEED THAT POMPEO
IS GOING TO GO THROUGH.
BUT I THINK THE TRUMP TEAM'S
VIEW IS THAT THE HEADS OF THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY AT THE
TOP LEVELS WERE OBAMA
APPOINTEES, AND AT THE C.I.A.,
YOU HAVE JOHN BRENNAN, WHO HAS
ALREADY RESIGNED, AND ALSO,
LIKEWISE, THE DIRECTOR OF
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, JIM
CLAPPER, HAS ALSO RESIGNED.
AND I THINK THERE WAS, YOU KNOW,
NOT A GOOD RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
TRUMP AND EITHER OF THOSE MEN.
SO HE'S GOING TO HAVE POMPEO
COMING IN AT THE C.I.A., AND
PROBABLY FORMER REPUBLICAN
SENATOR DAN COATES COMING IN AS
DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE, AND I THINK THE
HOPE ON HIS TEAM IS THAT THAT
WILL BE A FRESH START.
YOU WON'T HAVE, YOU KNOW, KIND
OF MISTRUSTS, YOU KNOW,
POISONED... A POISONED WELL THAT
YOU MIGHT HAVE HAD WITH THOSE
TWO GUYS WHO WERE ON THEIR WAY
OUT.
BUT THE LAST THING I'LL SAY
ABOUT THAT IS I DON'T THINK THAT
SOLVES THE PROBLEM.
AMONG THE RANK AND FILE I THINK
THERE IS A LOT OF CONFUSION,
DISTRUST, AND EVEN ANGER AT THE
WAY TRUMP HAS TALKED ABOUT THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY THE LAST
SEVERAL WEEKS.
SO JUST CHANGING THE LEADERSHIP
ISN'T GOING TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEM.
AND I DON'T KNOW HOW HE FIXES
IT.
IT'S REALLY GOING TO DEPEND ON I
THINK WHETHER HE TAKES THEIR
ADVICE, SEEMS TO TAKE THEM
SERIOUSLY, LISTENS TO THEM, AND
WHETHER HIS NEW SENIOR
LEADERSHIP CAN KIND OF REPAIR
THE RELATIONSHIP MOVING
DOWNWARD.
>> Stewart: SO FAR, WHAT HAS
MR. TRUMP SIGNALED AS HIS
NATIONAL SECURITY PRIORITIES?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT HE HAS
MADE CLEAR THAT POSSIBLY HIS TOP
PRIORITY-- I MEAN, YOU KNOW,
MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, OF
COURSE.
AND AS HE SAID IN HIS INAUGURAL
SPEECH, AMERICA FIRST.
SO HE IS SAYING HE WANTS TO
REORIENT OUR FOREIGN POLICY IN A
WAY THAT, YOU KNOW, THE WAY I
HEAR IT SPENDS LESS MONEY AND
BLOOD AND TREASURE OVERSEAS
DEFENDING ALLIES, BUILDING UP
THE MILITARIES OF OUR ALLIES SO
THEY CAN PROTECT THEMSELVES.
IT'S A LITTLE BIT MORE OF A
"YOU'RE ON YOUR OWN" ATTITUDE
TOWARDS OUR GLOBAL ALLIANCES,
INCLUDING THE NATO ALLIANCE, FOR
INSTANCE.
THAT HAS LEFT OUR ALLIES VERY
UNSETTLED.
I THINK WHEN YOU KIND OF GET
INTO POLICY ISSUES, REALLY
FIGHTING ISIS AND ISLAMIC
RADICALISM ARE AT THE TOP OF HIS
LIST.
HE SEEMS TO THINK THAT THERE'S
ALMOST NOTHING THAT'S WORTH
USING OUR MILITARY AND DIPLOMACY
FOR BEYOND CRUSHING ISIS AND
CRUSHING ITS, YOU KNOW, KIND OF
SIMILAR ORGANIZATIONS, LIKE
AL QAEDA.
BUT HE HAS NOT REALLY SPELLED
OUT IN POLICY TERMS HOW THAT
WOULD WORK, WHAT HE WOULD DO
THAT'S SO DIFFERENT FROM THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
AND THE LAST THING VERY QUICKLY,
OF COURSE, HE'S MADE CLEAR THAT
HE WANTS TO HAVE A NEW
RELATIONSHIP WITH RUSSIA, WHICH
IS GOING TO BE A VERY TRICKY AND
CONTROVERSIAL THING TO DO GIVEN
THE CLOUD, FRANKLY, OVER HIS
INAUGURATION RELATED TO REPORTS
THAT RUSSIA INTERFERED IN THE
U.S. ELECTION TO TRUMP'S
BENEFIT.
>> Stewart: MICHAEL CROWLEY
FROM "POLITICO," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Stewart: AT A MEETING OF
EUROPEAN NATIONALISTS IN GERMANY
TODAY, FRENCH FAR-RIGHT LEADER
MARINE Le PEN URGED EUROPEANS TO
FOLLOW THE EXAMPLE OF BRITAIN
AND THE UNITED STATES AND "WAKE
UP."
Le PEN, A CANDIDATE FOR
PRESIDENT OF FRANCE, SAID
BRITAIN'S VOTE TO LEAVE THE
EUROPEAN UNION, AND THE ELECTION
OF PRESIDENT TRUMP, WERE BLOWS
TO WHAT SHE CALLED THE "OLD
ORDER."
THE FRENCH ELECTION IS IN MAY.
IN THE WEST AFRICAN NATION OF
GAMBIA, THE LEADER WHO LOST AN
ELECTION HAS FINALLY AGREED TO
STEP DOWN.
YAHYA JAMMEH SAID TODAY HE WILL
GIVE UP POWER AND LEAVE THE
COUNTRY.
JAMMEH, WHO SEIZED POWER IN A
1994 COUP, WAS REFUSING TO
ACCEPT HIS DEFEAT LAST MONTH BY
ADAMA BARROW, WHO WAS SWORN IN
ON THURSDAY AS GAMBIA'S NEW
PRESIDENT.
AN AFRICAN MILITARY FORCE LED BY
SENEGAL HAD ENTERED THE SMALL
NATION OF TWO MILLION PEOPLE
THIS WEEK TO FORCE JAMMEH TO
STEP DOWN.
IN PAKISTAN TODAY, AT LEAST
18 PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND DOZENS
MORE INJURED WHEN A REMOTE-
CONTROL BOMB EXPLODED IN A
CROWDED VEGETABLE MARKET.
A MILITANT GROUP THAT TARGETS
SHI'ITE MUSLIMS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACK,
WHICH OCCURRED IN A
PREDOMINANTLY SHI'ITE MUSLIM
TRIBAL REGION ON THE NORTHWEST
BORDER WITH AFGHANISTAN.
IN NORTHERN ITALY, A BUS
CARRYING HUNGARIAN STUDENTS
RETURNING FROM THEIR ANNUAL SKI
VACATION IN FRANCE CRASHED NEAR
THE CITY OF VERONA TODAY.
ITALIAN POLICE SAY AT LEAST 16
PEOPLE DIED, MOST OF THEM
TEENAGERS.
26 OTHER PEOPLE WERE INJURED.
THE STUDENTS, FAMILY MEMBERS,
AND TEACHERS WERE RETURNING TO
BUDAPEST WHEN THE BUS HIT A
HIGHWAY PILLAR AND BURST INTO
FLAMES.
IN CENTRAL ITALY, THREE DAYS
AFTER AN AVALANCHE, RESCUERS
SAVED FOUR MORE PEOPLE TODAY.
THEY WERE AMONG 30 PEOPLE
STAYING IN A HOTEL THAT WAS
BURIED IN SNOW ON WEDNESDAY
AFTER TREMORS TRIGGERED THE
AVALANCHE.
NINE SURVIVORS ARE SAID TO BE IN
GOOD HEALTH, BUT FIVE PEOPLE
DIED, AND AT LEAST 15 ARE NOT
ACCOUNTED FOR.
>> Stewart: IN HIS VERY FIRST
WHITE HOUSE BRIEFING THIS
EVENING, TRUMP PRESS SECRETARY
SEAN SPICER COMPLAINED
JOURNALISTS UNDERESTIMATED THE
CROWD SIZE AT YESTERDAY'S
INAUGURATION.
HIS STATEMENT ECHOED THE
PRESIDENT, WHO EARLIER IN THE
DAY SAID HE BELIEVES THE CROWD
WAS AS HIGH AS A MILLION AND
HALF PEOPLE, DISPUTING REPORTS
THAT ONLY 250,000 ATTENDED.
>> NO ONE HAD NUMBERS BECAUSE
THE NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, WHICH
CONTROLS THE NATIONAL MALL,
DOES NOT PUT ANY OUT.
>> Stewart: YOU CAN SEE SIDE-BY-
SIDE AERIAL PHOTOS OF DONALD
TRUMP'S AND BARACK OBAMA'S FIRST
INAUGURAL AT pbs.org/newshour.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.